# A Study of Efficiency Between Conventional Keyboard and Stylus Input - Apple Pencil as an Example

## Overview

With the continuous technology iteration of computer hardware and the optimization of the system software, tablet computers have gradually become a technology tool that can be seen everywhere in people's daily lives. With the popularization of tablet computers, technology companies have invested a lot of resources to develop new user input modalities so that users can choose the most suitable one from a large number of input devices when using tablet computers. During the years of development, various input modalities have been developed. We can see that some old technologies have been eliminated, and some outdated input modalities have been injected with new and vigorous vitality by the innovation of new technologies, and are once again active in people's sights. The current two dominating input modalities, touch technology and stylus pen have already gone through this process. As far as we know, the most popular that can represent two input modalities are multi-touch and apple pencil. Both of them have already experienced several upgrades. We would like to know what causes this phenomenon to happen and repeat again and again. If we can investigate the influencing factors clearly, then we will have a very clear understanding of the current tablet input modes and devices. Knowing the pros and cons of mainstream input modalities, we can make certain conclusions from these findings. Some results may help hardware and software designers to invent more efficient, user-friendly, and comfortable tablet-related products in the future. Based on this, our research questions are (1) What is the difference between the performance of conventional keyboard input and apple pencil with touch screen when users complete input tasks. (2) After users use two completely different aforementioned methods to complete related input tasks, based on their experience, which one will the user be more satisfied with and prefer?

## Background

With the continuous technology iteration of computer hardware and the optimization of the system software, tablet computers have gradually become a technology tool that can be seen everywhere in people's daily lives. With the popularization of tablet computers, technology companies have invested a lot of resources to develop new user input modalities so that users can choose the most suitable one from a large number of input devices when using tablet computers. During the years of development, various input modalities have been developed. We can see that some old technologies have been eliminated, and some outdated input modalities have been injected with new and vigorous vitality by the innovation of new technologies, and are once again active in people's sights. The current two dominating input modalities, touch technology and stylus pen have already gone through this process. As far as we know, the most popular that can represent two input modalities are multi-touch and apple pencil. Both of them have already experienced several upgrades. We would like to know what causes this phenomenon to happen and repeat again and again. If we can investigate the influencing factors clearly, then we will have a very clear understanding of the current tablet input modes and devices. Knowing the pros and cons of mainstream input modalities, we can make certain conclusions from these findings. Some results may help hardware and software designers to invent more efficient, user-friendly, and comfortable tablet-related products in the future. Based on this, our research questions are (1) What is the difference between the performance of conventional keyboard input and apple pencil with touch screen when users complete input tasks. (2) After users use two completely different aforementioned methods to complete related input tasks, based on their experience, which one will the user be more satisfied with and prefer?

## Method

In this research, we will conduct an experiment to test the efficiency of different input modality. This experiment will involve UC Davis undergraduate students as subjects of experiment. We expect around 10 participants to take part in this experiment thus we will implement a within subject test. A survey will be used to select the participants prior to the experiment, which includes their experience on the two input methods and other information about their preference on input method. Counterbalancing techniques such as Latin Square will be considered to eliminate the confounding variables like learning effects during this experiment. The independent variable that will be controlled in this experiment is the modality of input. We expect this experiment to have a high internal validity, which means the dependent variable, task completion time and error rate will be fluctuated as the change of different testing conditions. This experiment will indicate whether our hypothesis is correct, as this will also provide us with data evidence to analyze.	After the experiment, a questionnaire will be given to the participants, which includes a bunch of questions related to their experience on the two input methods during the experiment. The data collected from participants’ experience will be used to analyze the second research question with the statistical methods learned from lectures. 

## Timeline

After this proposal, we will expand on our current survey design, get inputs from TAs and have a survey design ready by Oct 31. We will then start distributing our survey and by the end of the week on Nov 7 we will analyze the data we have collected. Then from Nov 8 - Nov 9 we will design our experiment based on the survey result and our initial hypothesis. After that we will implement our experiment we designed, our goal is to finish this by Nov 14. In the end, we will have enough data for our final report and presentation which will be finished by Nov 28.

+ Oct 25-31: Survey design
+ Nov1-7 : Distribute survey and survey result analysis
+ Nov 8-14: Experiment Design according to the result of survey and deploy the experiment
+ Nov 15-21: Implement the experiment and data analysis
+ Nov 22-28: Final report write up and refine the report, prepare for presentation